  1-1
Figure 1-1. The evolution of powered parachutes.
Figure 1-1. The evolution of powered parachutes. Figure 1-1. The evolution of powered parachutes.
History of the Powered Parachute
As early as the 12th century, the Chinese used an um­
brella-shape parachute design for recreation. About 
300 years later, Leonardo da Vinci blueprinted a pyra­
mid-shaped parachute. In the late 18th century, man 
jumped from towers and balloons with a parachute. 
The first parachute jump from an airplane occurred 
in 1912.
After World War II, sport jumping became a recre­
ational activity. The sport started with round para­
chutes, ranging in size from 20 to 30 feet in diameter. 
Parachutes evolved into a steerable, gliding wing 
smaller than today’s rectangular ram-air powered 
parachute (PPC) wing which is approximately 38 feet 
wide.
On October 1, 1964, Domina C. Jalbert applied for 
a patent for his “Multi-Cell Wing” named “Parafoil” 
(also known as a “ram-air” wing), which was a new 
parachute design. His ideas were registered as a U.S. 
patent on November 15,1966. [Figure 1-1 A] Howev­
er, in 1964 Lowell Farrand had already flown a motor­
ized version called “The Irish Flyer” by Nicolaides. 
[Figure 1-1 B] Farrand was the first person to put an 
engine on a ram-air inflated parachute wing, starting 
the evolution of the powered parachute with the Irish 
Flyer. This wing evolved into today’s modern pow­
ered parachute canopies, which include rectangular, 
elliptical, semi-elliptical, and hybrid wings.
The United States (U.S.) government had a number 
of test programs that used the square parachute as a 
means to glide spacecraft back to earth or glide pay­
loads dropped out of airplanes to a specific location.
Two-place powered parachutes have years of testing, 
development, and evolution. Training exemptions to 
Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) 
part 103, Ultralight Vehicles, permitted individuals 
to give instruction in two-place ultralight vehicles, 
instead of being restricted to vehicles intended for 
single occupants. [Figure 1-1 C] The Federal Avia­
tion Administration (FAA) allowed ultralight vehicle 
Figure 1-1. The evolution of powered parachutes. 
Chapter Heading
Figure 1-1. The evolution of powered parachutes.
A
C
D
B
