4-5
prevent this, slowly add power well before you get 
close to the ground where you will need power. This 
will give the system a chance to gradually open the 
thermostat and warm up the radiator water.
Just as it takes a while for the engine crankcase and 
bearings to warm up, it also takes those steel parts a 
long time to cool down. If you land, refuel and want 
to take off again quickly, there is no need to warm up 
again for 5 minutes. The lower end of the engine will 
stay warmed up after being shut down for short peri­
ods. An engine restart is an example where it would 
be appropriate to warm the engine up until the gauges 
reach operating temperatures. The lower end of the 
engine is warm and now you only need to be con­
cerned with preventing the pistons from seizing.
Four-Stroke Engine Warming
A four-stroke engine must also be warmed up. The 
four-stroke engine has a pressurized oil system that 
provides more uniform engine temperatures to all its 
components. You can apply takeoff power as soon 
as the water, cylinder head temperature (CHT), oil 
temperatures and oil pressure are within the manu­
facturer’s recommended tolerances for takeoff power 
applications.
Gearboxes
Gearboxes are used on all powered parachute recip­
rocating engines to take the rotational output of an 
internal combustion engine which is turning at a very 
high RPM and convert it to a slower (and more useful) 
RPM to turn the propeller. Gearboxes come in differ­
ent gear ratios depending on the output speed of the 
engine and the needed propeller turning speeds. 
A typical two-stroke RPM reduction is from 6,500 
engine RPM with a 3.47 to 1 reduction, resulting in 
1,873 propeller RPM. A typical four-stroke RPM re­
duction is from 5,500 engine RPM with a 2.43 to 1 
reduction, resulting in 2,263 propeller RPM.
A gearbox is a simple device that bolts directly to the 
engine and in turn has the propeller bolted directly 
to it. 
A two-cycle engine gearbox is kept lubricated with 
its own built-in reservoir of heavy gearbox oil. The 
reservoir is actually part of the gearbox case itself. 
The gearbox oil has to be changed periodically since 
the meshing of the gears will cause them to wear and 
will deposit steel filings into the oil. If the oil is not 
The cylinders have steel cylinder walls that expand 
slowly compared to aluminum pistons that expand 
quickly. If an engine is revved too quickly during 
takeoff before warming up, a lot of heat is generated 
on top of the piston. That quickly expands the piston, 
which can then seize in the cylinder. A piston seizure 
will stop the engine abruptly.
The second area of concern is lower in the engine 
around the engine crankshaft. This is an area where 
things may get too loose with heat, rather than seizing 
up. Additionally, the crankcase has steel bearings set 
into the aluminum which need to expand together or 
the bearings could slip.
Many two-stroke engines have steel bearings that nor­
mally hug the walls of the aluminum engine case. The 
crank spins within the donuts of those steel bearings. 
If you heat up the engine two quickly, the aluminum 
case will out-expand those steel bearings and the 
crank will cause the bearings to start spinning along 
with it. If those steel bearings start spinning, they can 
ruin the soft aluminum walls of the case, which is 
very expensive.
If heat is slowly added to an engine, all the parts will 
expand more evenly. This is done through a proper 
warm-up procedure. Many two-stroke engines are 
best warmed up by running the engine at a set RPM 
for a set amount of time. Follow the instructions in 
your POH; however, a good rule of thumb is to ini­
tially start the engine at idle RPM, get it operating 
smoothly, and then warm the engine at 3,000 RPM 
for 5 minutes.
Once the engine is warmed up and the powered para­
chute is flying, it is still possible to cool down the 
engine too much. This will happen when the engine is 
idled back for an extended period of time. Even though 
the engine is running, it is not generating as much heat 
as the cooling system is efficiently dumping into the 
atmosphere. An immediate power application with a 
cooled engine can seize the engine just as if the engine 
had not been warmed in the first place. 
In water-cooled engines, on a long descent at idle, the 
coolant cools until the thermostat closes and the en­
gine is not circulating the radiator fluid through the 
engine. The engine temperature remains at this ther­
mostat closed temperature while the radiator coolant 
continues to cool further. If full throttle is applied, the 
thermostat can open allowing a blast of coolant into 
the warm engine. The piston is expanding because of 
the added heat and the cylinder is cooling with the 
cold radiator water resulting in a piston seizure. To 
